#+title: My True-To-The-Earth Book Review: JIRA 5.2 Essentials
# bhj-tags: reading

Because I wrote an Emacs plugin for using Jira with org-mode.el, named
org-jira.el, some guy at this book's publishing house came up with my
name and asked me to write a book review for it. And here it is.

Jira is very popular. My ex-employer, my current employer, and one of
my possible next employer (Intel) are all using Jira. One reason of
this wild popularity is because Jira is very easy to use. Every body
can start to use it with minimum effort. When I work at Motorola, they
use ClearQuest, and the reference manual is so thick that you can use
it as a weapon to strike people unconscious. But Jira, it's so simple
and intuitive that you can go a long way without seeing any need even
for its on-line help, which is already high quality. So why a book on
Jira?

Well, this book provides you the Big Picture of Jira. If you only
learn Jira by using it and probably also with the help of the online
documents, you are easily trapped in a small corner of Jira, albeit
the most obvious and easy to access part. True, it might be the most
useful part of Jira, and you will expand it with increased exposure
with and poking around in Jira. This book just make it easier for you
with the expanding process. With the big picture in your eyes, you
gain the freedom to do more wild stuff to get your things done. Just
don't overdo it, keep your process light:-)

It also teaches you how to administrate Jira. This may seem not so
useful to a common Jira user. But if you happen to be a Jira Admin or
a PM, then these info are valuable. Even to the User, it can be more
helpful than it seems. Because everybody should be a PM nowadays (or so I've
heard).

The final chapter is on how to use Jira (with an additional Jira
plug-in, GreenHopper) for Agile Development. Agile people might love
to check it out.

After you gain the Big Picture, this book is also great as a reference
manual, the topics are well organized and easy to look up.

Last but not least, some ad for my org-jira. If you are a hacker using
Emacs and org-mode and Jira all at the same time, then you definitely
will like [[../../../2011/12/28/org-jira.org][org-jira]].

